SURMA: What is it?
Give me the TLDR.
JAKE: Well, OK.
On mobile-- this is
not going to be a TLDR.
This is going to be long.
[LAUGHING]
SURMA: I want a
T-- that makes it
like an appetizer
for the audience.
JAKE: OK.
In, like, a movie
trailer-esque--
SURMA: One tab, one desire.
JAKE: (IMITATES
TRAILER NARRATOR)
We don't have enough
memory for all these tabs!
It doesn't matter.
We don't need all the tabs.
[MIMICS EXPLOSIONS] Coming soon
to a browser near you, the Page
Lifecycle API!
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've been reading an article--
well, OK.
So I was involved very roughly
at the start of this API.
But I didn't have time to do
anything meaningful to it.
SURMA: That's just
the career, man.
JAKE: Yeah.
I was saying that at the start,
it seems like it lends me some
credibility, but
it really doesn't.
But Phil Walton
has been involved
with this from the start.
And he wrote an article
that we'll link to as well.
This is the Page Lifecycle API.
SURMA: Oh, yes.
JAKE: This is a new thing
that dropped in Chrome 68.
Very exciting.
I think it's exciting.
SURMA: OK.
What is it?
Give me the TLDR.
JAKE: Well, OK.
On mobile-- this is
not going to be a TLDR.
This is going to be long.
[LAUGHING]
SURMA: I want a T--
that makes it like an
appetizer for the audience
to keep listening.
JAKE: Pages can be
torn down, right?
Like, on mobile, there's no--
SURMA: And they often are.
JAKE: Yeah.
On mobile, you go away
from the browser--
SURMA: The second you--
JAKE: --pages go away,
SURMA: So you said--
JAKE: --the whole
browser goes away.
SURMA: --when you go away
from the browser, or just
different tab?
Or--
JAKE: Different tabs, as well.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: Yeah.
If you go to a different tab--
SURMA: Doesn't it have, like,
I'm going to type something in.
Oh, I need to look up what
the code was on the other tab.
Go back, go back,
everything is gone.
Noooo!
JAKE: Exactly.
And so it's worse on
devices with less memory.
If you got a bit more
memory, it's better.
But I think, by default,
if a tab has not
been used for five minutes
on Android, we get rid.
SURMA: OK.
JAKE: Other mobile platforms do
exactly the same thing, right?
Like, phones have less memory.
So it's kind of like, can we
get that into the specs somehow?
Can we do the sensible thing?
So the current
state of things is
that, we can think of a
page having an active state
and a passive state.
This exists already.
Active is, you're
using that page.
You're clicking around.
You're doing stuff.
Brilliant.
And then passive
is, it's blurred.
SURMA: You've lost focus.
JAKE: You've lost focus.
And that's what we
call the passive state.
And you get events for that.
You've had events for that
for ages-- unfocused, blur.
Yeah.
unfocus, unblur.
SURMA: But these are
the only [INAUDIBLE],,
because these are also on
the input elements, right?
When an individual input
element gets focus,
literally, the code is in there.
But there's also
document-level focus and blur.
JAKE: Exactly.
Yes.
And so when it's in the
passive state, it could still--
because it will run
JavaScript and stuff, right?
Because that's your--
SURMA: setTimeout [INAUDIBLE]
JAKE: Yeah.
Some things might be reduced.
They tend not to be too much
because it's still visible.
It could be on your
second monitor, your--
SURMA: Yes, but we're
not talking mobile
here exclusively.
We're talking about
both mobile and desktop.
JAKE: Yes.
But I mean, with phones
that have split screen view,
you could still have
this style thing.
And then the next
state is Hidden.
SURMA: Ah, that's
Visibility API, isn't it?
JAKE: Visibility API.
So you've got the
Visibility Change event.
And this is when you
switch to another tab.
SURMA: Does the desktop actually
detect occlusion, as well?
JAKE: Do you know what?
I knew you were
going to ask this.
So I tested it, and it does not.
SURMA: Cool.
JAKE: But do you know what?
Browsers could do that.
That would be a
valid thing to do.
So what they do-- or the
ones I tested anyway,
which is browsers on Mac,
Firefox, Safari, and Chrome--
I should remember that last one.
If you switch desktops,
it will Visibility
Hidden, because
technically, it is hidden.
SURMA: Full screen?
Or also on workspace
to workspace?
JAKE: So--
SURMA: I gotcha!
Didn't test that.
JAKE: Yeah, I didn't
test full screen.
But I presume it would
work because it's still
going onto a desktop
that's dominant view.
So you get events
for that as well.
And then you can go from
Hidden to Terminated, right?
You close a tab.
It's going to go
through those phases.
And it is mostly a line, right?
You can go--
SURMA: Yeah, it's like a--
JAKE: Active and
Passive in Mac, you
can go from Passive
to Hidden, then back.
You can go from
Hidden to Terminate.
You can't go back
from that one, but--
SURMA: True.
But you can't go
from Hidden to--
JAKE: Active.
SURMA: Active in one step.
There has to be the "you are
now visible" step in between.
So it's like a nice hierarchy
of states that you can be in.
JAKE: Exactly.
And saying that you can't go
from Active to Terminated,
ah, except if--
SURMA: Except you can.
JAKE: I think on mobile you can.
And that's like if the
browser goes out of memory.
If a tab crashes,
of course, you've
gone from Active to Terminated.
But mostly, it's a
nice linear system.
New bits.
From the Hidden state--
SURMA: So what's missing?
Why are we doing new bits?
JAKE: Well, so--
SURMA: Because you want
to hook into these.
And we have a couple of events.
JAKE: So we want this new
state called "Frozen."
SURMA: OK.
JAKE: And this is
where you've got--
we want to start
turning off timers.
We want to start, essentially--
SURMA: Like set timeout timers.
JAKE: We want to stop
the page running.
SURMA: OK.
JAKE: But--
SURMA: Not terminate it.
JAKE: We want to be able to--
yeah, we want to be
able to bring back.
You're still going
to use memory.
Or I mean, I suppose you could
write that memory to disk.
SURMA: I guess you
want to freeze it.
JAKE: That would be a
good name for it, yes.
Exactly.
So this is the new state.
And it's also browsers that
have a back-forward page
cache are going to use to
define that, the BF cache.
So yeah, it's called Frozen.
And then so you'll get
a Frozen event when
it goes from Hidden to Frozen,
and a Resume event when
it goes from Frozen to Hidden.
And another new state, from
Frozen, it can go to Discarded.
SURMA: OK.
JAKE: And this is
specifically for that.
It's gone, but there might
still be UI representing it.
And this is what
you have on mobile,
because although we get--
SURMA: Ah, is this
the Android thing
where they just save the
screenshot, more or less,
off the app so we
can swipe through.
But if you actually activate
it, it actually has to boot up.
JAKE: Exactly.
And so, yeah, even Androids,
the browser goes out of memory,
you open it up, all
those tabs are there.
Some of them,
through screenshots,
try and pretend that
they're still active.
But they're not.
They're going to
do a full reload.
So this is a new thing.
You've got events
for all of these,
including these new ones.
SURMA: All of these,
and the old ones,
as well, you said are events.
JAKE: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They're all events.
SURMA: So can I prevent
defaulting, and be like, no!
I don't want you to suspend me!
JAKE: You may not.
No.
You can react to them, but no,
you can't control any of them.
SURMA: That's interesting.
So you say I can react to them.
So there's a grace
period where I'm still
allowed to run code
before the actual freezing
or whatever happens?
JAKE: So the recommendation
is, on Hidden,
when you get into the
Hidden stage, which
is that you use the Visibility
Change to pick that up--
save any data that you--
SURMA: Like to IDB or whatever.
JAKE: To IDB or whatever.
And when you get
the Freeze event,
you have the length of that
event, really, synchronously.
SURMA: So no async.
JAKE: There might
be a grace period,
but you really,
for safety, would
treat that as synchronous.
SURMA: Wouldn't this be a great
use case for like prevent F4--
JAKE: For wait until-- yeah.
That was discussed,
but I don't think
anyone could agree on
what the time should be.
And there's worries
about, people would just
use it to keep the page
alive or something like that.
SURMA: Yeah, OK, fair.
JAKE: I mean, that might
still happen in some ways
because heuristics--
if sound is playing,
it's not going to freeze a tab.
So you'd get that hackware,
play an empty sound.
And you use everyone's battery,
but you get to stay alive.
So yeah, but on Freeze, you
get that length of time.
And this is like an API
which I have not used in ages
comes into play.
And that's session storage.
So there's a bit of
special behavior here.
And I was looking at
the spec versus the--
this doesn't seem well
written in the space.
It's kind of as an example.
But the suggestion is that,
if a tab is discarded--
so the page is
essentially unloaded.
It's gone.
You saw that the tab there.
And when you click back to
it, it's going to reload.
Session storage will persist.
SURMA: Interesting.
JAKE: Because the
tab is still there.
SURMA: But if I close the
tab, and then Command-Shift
to reopen, that will be--
JAKE: Then it's gone.
So it's a nice safe place
to put data that's--
for maybe legal reasons or for
usability reasons-- that you
don't think should persist
beyond the life of a tab,
but it will persist
beyond discarding.
And once the page reloads, there
is document dot was discarded.
SURMA: Oh, for if you're
being restored or actually
being loaded completely fresh.
JAKE: So if the user
closes the tab to the app,
and they go back to it, we
could, using web storage,
show them--
put the app into the
same state it was before.
And I've always been really
unsure about that because--
SURMA: I mean, it
depends on the app.
But in this app it seems
unexpected, I guess.
JAKE: Right, because I think
one of the benefits of doing
something like image compression
on the client is you can say,
we're not sending it to
the server or anything.
This is fine to use
for private data.
But the problem is, someone
puts a sensitive image
into the app, close
the app, and then
they give their laptop
someone else or something,
or they open it on stage.
And suddenly there's,
let's say, a receipt
with important information.
SURMA: Yeah.
Not nudes.
JAKE: Not nudes, no.
But with this, this sounds like
a good way of doing it, right,
this being able to--
SURMA: Yeah.
Now, you have a proper
semantic for when to check
what you've stored, and--
JAKE: Because it
seems understandable,
if there's a tab
still there, it's
understanding from
a user's perspective
that if they go
back into that tab,
it should be in the same
state as they left it.
SURMA: Yes.
Exactly.
JAKE: In fact, it's almost
unexpected to be the opposite.
SURMA: I haven't looked at
session storage ever, I think.
Is it synchronous
like local storage?
JAKE: Yep.
It's the same kind of API.
The benefit of it in
legal terms, I think,
is that the storage
is held in memory.
I think in certain
circumstances,
rules change once
that goes onto disk.
SURMA: Yeah.
And you've got--
I think, historically you would
be using cookies or something,
but that would actually
go onto the network.
And you don't want that.
JAKE: Right, and that's on disk,
as well, and on the network.
I think it's just local storage.
SURMA: So Lifecycle API,
you said it's in Chrome 68?
JAKE: Chrome 68.
There's some nice
debugging tools.
If you go to Chrome
colon Discards,
there's a nice little API
there where you can put pages
into certain states.
Because we have ambitions to
do this on desktop, as well.
SURMA: I would hope so.
JAKE: Because, I mean, I
don't know about the amount
of tabs you have.
SURMA: I have many of them.
And I am the Great Suspender,
because I have so many tabs,
and they all stay active.
Right?
So I have a Chrome extension
that puts them to sleep.
JAKE: Puts them to sleep.
Right.
SURMA: So if I cannot
have to have an extension,
but rather Chrome do it
itself, I'm all for that.
JAKE: And it's good
for memory, as well,
because you know that stuff's--
SURMA: But to be clear,
this is a standard, right?
JAKE: Yes, this
is a web standard.
It's on the YCG Page Lifecycle.
Yeah.
Things like back-forward
cache have been built into it.
So it's not just with Chrome in
mind, it's with other browsers,
as well.
SURMA: Cool.
JAKE: So Safari and Firefox
have the back-forward cache.
Yeah.
I think it's really good.
I think it's not
just good for mobile,
I think it's going to
be good for desktop
down the line as well.
SURMA: Cool.
JAKE: I'm not
entirely comfortable
with the idea of human contact.
I don't think it's right.
SURMA: I mean, that's not
surprising considering
you are very vocal about
not being a hugger.
JAKE: Yeah.
I'm not a great hugger.
I do it if necessary.
[LAUGHTER]